OSDOCS-3300:Adds openshift upgrade duration section (#46241)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/upgrade-duration-mco.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding-openshift-upgrade-duration.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="machine-config-operator_{context}"]
= Machine Config Operator
The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and worker node. During this process, the MCO performs the following sequential actions on each node of the cluster:

. Cordon and drain all the nodes
. Update the operating system (OS)
. Reboot the nodes
. Uncordon all nodes and schedule workloads on the node

[NOTE]
====
When a node is cordoned, it is unavailable to schedule a workload.
====

The time to complete this process depends on several factors including the node and infrastructure configuration. This process might take 5 or more minutes to complete per node.

In addition to MCO, you should consider the impact of following parameters:

> * The control plane node upgrade duration is predictable and oftentimes shorter than worker nodes, because the control plane workloads are tuned for graceful updates and quick drains.

Reviewer: In our test, control plane node update seems more faster than worker node update.
```
# ./oc get mcp
NAME     CONFIG                                             UPDATED   UPDATING   DEGRADED   MACHINECOUNT   READYMACHINECOUNT   UPDATEDMACHINECOUNT   DEGRADEDMACHINECOUNT   AGE
master   rendered-master-cc789c1d36213cf18743861f0ac9768d   False     True       False      3              1                   1                     0                      3h57m
worker   rendered-worker-0b67efd8082c03ad9d3220b1ce00ede2   True      False      False      2              2                   2                     0                      3h57m
```
From above, the control plane and worker node should start update at the same time, but 2 worker nodes has finished the update whereas only 1 control plane has finished update. Anything missing here?

Reviewer: cc @wking to confirm.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it is because the worker nodes do not have any workload running on them.

* You can upgrade the worker nodes in parallel by setting the `maxUnavailable` field to greater than 1 in the machine configuration pool. The MCO cordons the number of nodes specified in `maxUnavailable` and marks them unavailable for upgrade.

* When you increase `maxUnavailable` on the machine configuration pool, it can help the pool to update more quickly. However, if `maxUnavailable` is set too high, and several nodes are cordoned simultaneously, the pod disruption budget (PDB) guarded workloads could fail to drain because a schedulable node cannot be found to run the replicas. If you increase `maxUnavailable` for the machine configuration pool, ensure that you still have sufficient schedulable nodes to allow PDB guarded workloads to drain.

* Before you begin the upgrade, you must ensure that all the nodes are available. Any unavailable nodes can significantly impact the upgrade duration because the node unavailability affects the `maxUnavailable` and pod disruption budgets.
+

> To check the status of nodes, run the following command:

Author: @jiajliu Thanks. I have updated the command to `# ./oc get node`

+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get machineconfigpools

Reviewer: And this command is to check if updating status of the nodes.
```
# ./oc get machineconfigpools
NAME     CONFIG                                             UPDATED   UPDATING   DEGRADED   MACHINECOUNT   READYMACHINECOUNT   UPDATEDMACHINECOUNT   DEGRADEDMACHINECOUNT   AGE
master   rendered-master-cc789c1d36213cf18743861f0ac9768d   True      False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      156m
worker   rendered-worker-e6e562275f5dd389f41fdebb24535f56   True      False      False      2              2                   2                     0                      156m
```

----
+

> You can use this endpoint URL to get the machine-config operator's take on nodes:

Reviewer: According to above two comments, should we still need this part here?

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding-openshift-upgrade-duration.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="machine-config-operator-node-updates_{context}"]
= Machine Config Operator node updates
The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and worker node. During this process, the MCO performs the following sequential actions on each node of the cluster:

. Cordon and drain all the nodes
. Update the operating system (OS)
. Reboot the nodes
. Uncordon all nodes and schedule workloads on the node

[NOTE]
====
When a node is cordoned, it is unavailable to schedule a workload.
====

The time to complete this process depends on several factors including the node and infrastructure configuration. This process might take 5 or more minutes to complete per node.

In addition to MCO, you should consider the impact of the following parameters:

* The control plane node upgrade duration is predictable and oftentimes shorter than worker nodes, because the control plane workloads are tuned for graceful updates and quick drains.

> * You can upgrade the worker nodes in parallel by setting the `maxUnavailable` field to greater than 1 in the machine config pool. The MCO cordons the number of nodes specified in `maxUnavailable` and marks them unavailable for upgrade.

Author: fixed.

* When you increase `maxUnavailable` on the machine config pool, it can help the pool to update more quickly. However, if `maxUnavailable` is set too high, and several nodes are cordoned simultaneously, the pod disruption budget (PDB) guarded workloads could fail to drain because a schedulable node cannot be found to run the replicas. If you increase `maxUnavailable` for the machine config pool, ensure that you still have sufficient schedulable nodes to allow PDB guarded workloads to drain.

> * Before you begin the upgrade, you must ensure that all the nodes are available. Any unavailable nodes can significantly impact the upgrade duration because the node unavailability affects the `maxUnavailable` and pod disruption budgets.

Author: @opayne1 I totally agree with you. But this section explains about OCP upgrade duration. To be consistent with the title and overall content, I would suggest:

> Before you being the **cluster** upgrade,.....

wdyt?

> * Before you begin the upgrade, you must ensure that all the nodes are available. Any unavailable nodes can significantly impact the upgrade duration because the node unavailability affects the `maxUnavailable` and pod disruption budgets.

Reviewer 3: hmmm honestly I am not sure. I am going to bring @bergerhoffer in on this one for some advice.

> * Before you begin the upgrade, you must ensure that all the nodes are available. Any unavailable nodes can significantly impact the upgrade duration because the node unavailability affects the `maxUnavailable` and pod disruption budgets.

Author: @bergerhoffer Could you please suggest?

> * Before you begin the upgrade, you must ensure that all the nodes are available. Any unavailable nodes can significantly impact the upgrade duration because the node unavailability affects the `maxUnavailable` and pod disruption budgets.

Reviewer 4: @darshan-nagaraj @opayne1 In this case, I would take a look at the whole section of "upgrade duration" and check with the SMEs on whether that can be changed to "update duration", so that it is consistent with what we prefer in OpenShift docs.

We use "update" whenever possible, so I would think that changing this term here to "update" makes sense. For example, we talk about them as "updates" in our general understanding updates section here: http://file.rdu.redhat.com/dnagaraj/OSDOCS-3300/updating/understanding-openshift-updates.html

@darshan-nagaraj Can you check with your SMEs on whether we can make this change? Both Lala and Scott Dodson had approved us preferring the term "update" (in this PR here: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/40525)

> * Before you begin the upgrade, you must ensure that all the nodes are available. Any unavailable nodes can significantly impact the upgrade duration because the node unavailability affects the `maxUnavailable` and pod disruption budgets.

Author: @sdodson Fixed.

+
To check the status of nodes from the terminal, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get node
----

+
.Example Output
[source,terminal]
----
NAME                                        STATUS                      ROLES   AGE     VERSION
ip-10-0-137-31.us-east-2.compute.internal   Ready,SchedulingDisabled    worker  12d     v1.23.5+3afdacb
ip-10-0-151-208.us-east-2.compute.internal  Ready                       master  12d     v1.23.5+3afdacb
ip-10-0-176-138.us-east-2.compute.internal  Ready                       master  12d     v1.23.5+3afdacb
ip-10-0-183-194.us-east-2.compute.internal  Ready                       worker  12d     v1.23.5+3afdacb
ip-10-0-204-102.us-east-2.compute.internal  Ready                       master  12d     v1.23.5+3afdacb
ip-10-0-207-224.us-east-2.compute.internal  Ready                       worker  12d     v1.23.5+3afdacb
----

+
If any node status is `NotReady` or `SchedulingDisabled`, then it is not available and impacts the upgrade duration.

+

> To check the status of nodes from the web console, you can:

Author: @opayne1 How about ?

> To check the status of nodes from the web console, go to  Administrator’s navigation panel and expand **Compute** → **Node**.

> To check the status of nodes from the web console, you can:

Reviewer 3: @darshan-nagaraj what do you think of this to keep in active voice? 

```suggestion
You can check the status of nodes from the web console by visiting the Administrator’s navigation panel and expanding Compute → Node.
```
or something like that.
